                                              DISCLAIMER
      Mapping of various Central sector, Centrally sponsored and State Government schemes and programmes
has been prepared to cater to the needs of the Hon’ble Members of Parliament for general information purposes
only in reference to SAGY guidelines. This document may however be used by others for appropriate planning
activities under SAGY.
     The sources of information are Government websites, planning documents and State Governments. State
schemes so mapped were requested for validation by each State Government. Many schemes covered under the
document are mapped based on relevance to SAGY Guidelines only, therefore, they may not be comprehensive
and / or complete.
      We endeavour to keep the information up to date and correct, however, we make no representations or
warranties of any kind, express or implied, about the completeness, accuracy, reliability, suitability or availability
with respect to the content, websites, the information, services, or related graphics contained on the website for
any purpose. Any reliance you place on such information is therefore, strictly at your own risk.
      In no event will we be liable for any loss or damage including without limitation, indirect or consequential
loss or damage, or any loss or damage whatsoever arising from loss of data or profits arising out of, or in connection
with, the use of this document.
     Through this document you are able to link to other Ministries / State Government and websites which
are not under the control of this Ministry. We have no control over the nature, content and availability of those
content.
      The SAGY cell, Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India expressly disclaims liability for any errors
on information and content of Government schemes in this compilation. We urge you to consult the concerned
Ministries / State Government officials / Government websites for updated and authentic information on the
various Government schemes and programmes.
