 S.                                                          Central/    Central Ministry/                                                                                   7
                Activity             Scheme/ Institutions                                                       Relevant Components/Description
No.                                                           State      State Nodal Dept.
8     Universal access to basic      National Rural Health   Central    Ministry of Health &   Activities which are taken up under NRHM are listed below:
      health facilities consisting   Mission (NRHM)                     Family Welfare         1. Acredited Social Health Activists for establishing a link between
      of health card, medical                                                                      the community and the health system.
      examination                                                                              2. Rogi Kalyan Samiti (Patient Welfare Committee)/Hospital
                                                                                                   Management Society to manage the affairs of the hospital.
                                                                                               3. Improved efficacy of Auxiliary Nurse Midwives (ANMs) in the field




                                                                                                                                                                            Human Development
                                                                                                   that can now undertake better antenatal care and other health
                                                                                                   care services.
                                                                                               4. Village Health Sanitation and Nutrition Committees (VHSNC)
                                                                                                   have used untied grants to increase their involvement in their
                                                                                                   local communities to address the needs of poor households and
                                                                                                   children.
                                                                                               5. Health care contractors in under-served areas. Janani Suraksha
                                                                                                   Yojana (JSY) for promoting institutional delivery. National Mobile
                                                                                                   Medical Units (NMMUs).
                                                                                               6. National Ambulance Services; Emergency response services and
                                                                                                   patient transport system.
                                                                                               7. Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram (JSSK) to provide free to
                                                                                                   and fro transport, free drugs, free diagnostic, free blood, free
                                                                                                   diet to pregnant women who come for delivery in public health
                                                                                                   institutions and sick infants up to one year.
                                                                                               8. Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram (RBSK) to screen diseases
                                                                                                   specific to childhood, developmental delays, disabilities, birth
                                                                                                   defects and deficiencies.
                                                                                               9. Mother and Child Health Wings (MCH Wings) in high case load
                                                                                                   district hospitals and CHCs which would create additional beds for
                                                                                                   mothers and children.
                                                                                               10. Free Drugs and Free Diagnostic Service to provide Free Drugs
                                                                                                   Service and Free Diagnostic Service with a motive to lower the out-
                                                                                                   of-pocket expenditure on health.
                                                                                               11. District Hospital and Knowledge Centre (DHKC) to provide multi-
                                                                                                   specialty health care including dialysis care, intensive cardiac care,
                                                                                                   cancer treatment, mental illness, emergency medical and trauma
                                                                                                   care, etc.
                                                                                               12. National Iron+ Initiative to look at Iron Deficiency Anaemia in
                                                                                                   which beneficiaries will receive iron and folic acid supplementation
                                                                                                   irrespective of their Iron/Hb status.
